General Instructions :
Read the following instructions very carefully and strictly follow them :
(i) This question paper comprises four Sections - A, B, C and D.
(ii) There are 37 questions in the question paper. All questions are compulsory.
(iii) Section A - Questions no. 1 to 20 are very short answer type questions, carrying one mark each.
(iv) Section B - Questions no. 21 to 27 are short answer type questions, carrying two marks each.
(v) Section C - Questions no. 28 to 34 are long answer type questions, carrying three marks each.
(vi) Section D - Questions no. 35 to 37 are also long answer type questions, carrying five marks each.
(vii) There is no overall choice in the question paper. However, an internal choice has been provided in 2 questions of 1 mark, 2 questions of 2 marks, 1 question of three marks and all the 3 questions of five marks. You have to attempt only one of the choices in such questions.
(viii) In addition to this, separate instructions are given with each section and question, wherever necessary.
(ix) Use of calculators and log tables is not permitted.
(x) You may use the following values of physical constants wherever necessary.
c = 3 ? 108 m/s
h = 6.63 ? 10-34 Js
e = 1.6 ? 10-19 C
?0 = 4? ? 10-7 T m A-1
?0 = 8.854 ? 10-12 C2 N-1 m-2

1


4 ??0

= 9 ? 109 N m2 C-2

Mass of electron (me) = 9.1 ? 10-31 kg Mass of neutron = 1.675 ? 10-27 kg Mass of proton = 1.673 ? 10-27 kg
Avogadro's number = 6.023 ? 1023 per gram mole Boltzmann constant = 1.38 ? 10-23 JK-1
3	P.T.O.

SECTION A
Note :	Select the most appropriate option from those given below each question :
1. A charge Q is uniformly distributed over the surface of a spherical shell of radius R. The work done in bringing a test charge Q0 from its centre to
its surface is	1

(A)

  1	 QQ0

4??0	R

(B)

  1	 QQ0




(C)

4??0	2R
QQ0
?0R

(D)	Zero
2. A zener diode has	1
(A) heavily doped p-side and lightly doped n-side.
(B) heavily doped n-side and lightly doped p-side.
(C) heavily doped n-side as well as p-side.
(D) lightly doped n-side as well as p-side.
3. Two large conducting spheres carrying charges Q1 and Q2 are kept with their centres r distance apart. The magnitude of electrostatic force

between them is not exactly

1
4??0

Q1Q2
r2

because	1

(A) these are not point charges.
(B) charge distribution on the spheres is not uniform.
(C) charges on spheres	will shift towards	the centres of their respective spheres.
(D) charges will shift towards the portions of the spheres which are closer and facing towards each other.
4. A charged particle is placed between the two plates of a charged parallel plate capacitor. It experiences a force F. If one plate is removed, then the force on the particle will be	1
(A) 2F	(B)	F

(C)

F	(D)	Zero
2

5	P.T.O.

5. In Bohr's model of hydrogen atom, the total energy of the electron in
nth discrete orbit is proportional to	1
(A) n	(B)	1
n
(C)	n2	(D)	1
n2
6. A uniform wire of 16 ? resistance is bent round in the form of a circle. When connected in a circuit between its two diametrically opposite points, its effective resistance will be	1
(A) 8 ?	(B)	16 ?
(C)	4 ?	(D)	2 ?
7. A region has a uniform magnetic field in it. A proton enters into the region with velocity making an angle of 45? with the direction of the magnetic field. In this region the proton will move on a path having the shape of a	1
(A) straight line
(B) circle
(C) spiral
(D) helix
8. An isosceles right angled current carrying loop PQR is placed in a
?
uniform magnetic field B pointing along PR. If the magnetic force acting
on the arm PQ is F, then the magnetic force which acts on the arm QR
will be	1

(A) F	(B)

(C)	F	(D)	- F
7	P.T.O.

9. The electric flux emerging out from 1 C charge is	1
(A) 1
?0
(B) 4?
(C) 4?
?0
(D) ?0

10.	m2V-1s-1 is the SI unit of which of the following ?1(A)Drift velocity(B)Mobility(C)Resistivity(D)Potential gradientNote :	Fill in the blanks with appropriate answer :
11. The shape of the wavefront originating from a point source of light is
	.	1
12. In	photoelectric	effect,	 the	number	of	emitted	photoelectrons	is proportional to 		of incident light.				1
OR
Light of frequency v is incident on a photosensitive surface of threshold frequency	v0 (v > v0).	The	value	of	kinetic	energy	of	the	emitted photoelectrons will be 			.							1
13. In Young's double slit experiment, if the monochromatic source of light is replaced by another monochromatic source of shorter wavelength, the value of fringe width will 	.	1
14. The refractive index of the material of a converging lens is 1·5. If air is replaced by a medium of refractive index 1·6, then the lens will now behave as a 	lens.	1

15. The value of Brewster's angle for air-glass interface is

? , hence the 3

refractive index of glass is 	.	1
Note :	Answer the following :
16. What is the value of power factor of a series LCR circuit at resonance ?	1
9	P.T.O.

17. In which orientation of the armature coil of an ac generator relative to
the magnetic field, will the induced emf be maximum ?	1
18. Mention the contribution of Indian physicist J.C. Bose in the production
of electromagnetic waves.	1
19. In an ac circuit, the applied voltage and flowing current are E = E0 sin ?t

and I = I0 sin (?t +

? ) respectively. What is the average power consumed
2

in one cycle in this circuit ?	1
OR
What happens when a block of metal is kept in a varying magnetic field ?	1
20. Name the electromagnetic radiations which may cause sunburn. Write their wavelength range.	1
SECTION B
21. The number densities of free electrons in three conductors X, Y and Z are in the ratio 4 : 1 : 8, and their electrical conductivities are in the ratio 2 : 1 : 2. For which conductor will the relaxation time of free electrons be
(a) maximum, and (b) minimum ?	2
22. A converging lens of focal length f1 is placed coaxially in contact with a diverging lens of focal length f2 (f1 > f2). Determine the power and nature
of the combination in terms of f1 and f2.	2
OR
How is the resolving power of a compound microscope affected if
(a) wavelength of light used is decreased, and (b) the diameter of its objective lens is increased ? Justify your answers.	2
23. (a)	Define the SI unit of self-inductance.
(b)	The self-inductance of a solenoid is L. If the number of turns per unit length in it is doubled and the area of cross-section is halved,
find the new inductance of the solenoid.	2
24. A hydrogen atom is in its third excited state.
(a) How many spectral lines can be emitted by it before coming to the ground state ? Show these transitions in the energy level diagram.
(b) In which of the above transitions will the spectral line of shortest wavelength be emitted ?	2
11	P.T.O.

25. How does an oscillating charge radiate an electromagnetic wave ? Give the relation between the frequency of radiated wave and the frequency of
oscillating charge.	2
OR
(a) Explain briefly the fact that electromagnetic waves carry energy.
(b) Why do we not feel the pressure due to sunshine ?	2
26. (a)	In what ways are matter waves different from electromagnetic waves ?

(b)	If the kinetic energy of a particle is reduced to one-fourth

1
? 4 ? of

?	?
its initial value, how many times will the de Broglie wavelength
associated with it become ?	2
27. Two	identical	bars,	one	of	paramagnetic	material	and	other	of diamagnetic material are kept in a uniform external magnetic field parallel to it. Draw diagrammatically the modifications in the magnetic field pattern in each case.							2
SECTION C
28. Using Kirchhoff 's rules, calculate the current (Ig) that flows through the galvanometer of resistance 15 ? in the circuit diagram shown in the figure.	3
29. Name the diode which can act as a voltage regulator. Explain its working with the help of its labelled circuit diagram. Draw its V - I characteristic.	3
30. (a)	The density of the nuclear matter is tremendously larger than the physical density of the material. Explain.
13	P.T.O.

(b) The nuclear forces are not coulomb forces between nucleons. Explain.
(c) Draw a plot of the potential energy between a pair of nucleons as a function of distance between them inside a nucleus.	3
31. What are matter waves ? Find the ratio of de Broglie wavelengths associated with proton and alpha particles when both particles
(a) are accelerated through the same potential difference.
(b) have same velocity.	3
32. A series LCR ac circuit has L = 2·0 H, C = 32 ?F and R = 10 ?.
(a) At what angular frequency of ac will it resonate ?
(b) Calculate the Q value of the circuit.	3

An ideal inductor of supply.


OR
5 H inductance is connected to a 200 V, 50 Hz ac
?

(a) Calculate the rms and peak value of current in the inductor.
(b) What is the phase difference between current through the inductor and the applied voltage ? How will it change if a small resistance is
connected in series with this inductor in the circuit ?	3
33. (a)	Using the necessary ray diagram, derive the mirror formula for a concave mirror.
(b)	In the magnified image of a measuring scale (with equidistant markings) lying along the principal axis of a concave mirror, the markings are not equidistant. Explain.	3
34. (a)	How are energy bands formed in a crystalline solid ?
(b)	Draw	the	energy	band	diagrams	for	p-type	and	n-type semiconductors. Depict the donor/acceptor energy levels in these diagrams and write their significance.					3
15	P.T.O.


SECTION D

35. (a) What is meant by plane polarised light ? An unpolarised light is incident at an angle ? on the surface of glass of refractive index ?. If the reflected and refracted rays are perpendicular to each other, then obtain the relationship between ? and ?.
(b) Two polaroids P1 and P2 are placed in a crossed position. Unpolarised light of intensity I0 is incident on P1. If P2 is rotated through  an  angle  ?  about  the  direction  of  propagation  of
light, keeping P1 fixed, plot the graph of intensity of light for 0? < ? < 360? which is (i) transmitted by P1, and (ii) transmitted
by P2.	5
OR
(a) Briefly describe the Young's double slit experiment of interference
of light. Drive the expression for fringe width in the pattern.
(b) Monochromatic light of wavelength 588 nm is incident from air to water interface. Find the wavelength and speed of the refracted

light. The refractive index of water is

4 .	5
3

36. (a)	An electric dipole of dipole moment ?p	is placed in a uniform
?
electric field E at an angle ? with it. Derive the expression for
torque ( ? ) acting on it. Find the orientation of the dipole relative to the electric field for which torque on it is (i) maximum, and
(ii) half of maximum.
(b) Two point charges q1 = + 1 ?C and q2 = + 4 ?C are placed 2 m apart in air. At what distance from q1 along the line joining the
two charges, will the net electric field be zero ?	5
OR
17	P.T.O.

(a) Derive an expression for the energy stored in a parallel plate capacitor of capacitance C when charged up to voltage V. How is this energy stored in the capacitor ?
(b) A capacitor of capacitance 1 ?F is charged by connecting a battery of negligible internal resistance and emf 10 V across it. Calculate the amount of charge supplied by the battery in charging the
capacitor fully.	5
37. (a)  Derive the expression for the force acting per unit length between two long straight parallel current carrying conductors. Hence define one ampere.
(b) Two long parallel straight conductors are placed 12 cm apart in air. They carry equal currents of 3 A each. Find the magnitude and direction of the magnetic field at a point midway between them (drawing a figure) when the currents in them flow in opposite
directions.	5
OR
(a) Draw the schematic sketch of a cyclotron. Explain the shape of the path on which charged particle moves when the particle is accelerated by it.
(b) To convert a given galvanometer into a voltmeter of ranges 2 V, V

and

V	volt, resistances R1, R2 and R3 ohm respectively, are

required to be connected in series with the galvanometer. Obtain
the relationship between R1, R2 and R3.	5













19






