General Instructions :
Read the following instructions very carefully and strictly follow them :
(i) This question paper comprises four sections - A, B, C and D.
(ii) There are 37 questions in the question paper. All questions are compulsory.
(iii) Section A : Q. no. 1 to 20 are very short-answer type questions carrying
1 mark each.
(iv) Section B : Q. no. 21 to 27 are short-answer type questions carrying
2 marks each.
(v) Section C : Q. no. 28 to 34 are long-answer type questions carrying
3 marks each.
(vi) Section D : Q. no. 35 to 37 are also long answer type questions carrying
5 marks each.
(vii) There is no overall choice in the question paper. However, an internal choice has been provided in two questions of one mark, two questions of two marks, one question of three marks and all the three questions five marks. You have to attempt only one of the choices in such questions.
(viii) However, separate instructions are given with each section and question, wherever necessary.
(ix) Use of calculators and log tables is not permitted.
(x) You may use the following values of physical constants wherever necessary :
c = 3 ? 108 m/s
h = 6.63 ? 10-34 Js
e = 1.6 ? 10-19 C
?0 = 4? ? 10-7 T m A-1
?0 = 8.854 × 10-12 C2 N-1 m-2
 1  = 9 ? 109 N m2 C-2
4??0
Mass of electron (me) = 9.1 ? 10-31 kg Mass of neutron = 1.675 × 10-27 kg Mass of proton = 1.673 × 10-27 kg
Avogadro's number = 6.023 × 1023 per gram mole Boltzmann constant = 1.38 × 10-23 JK-1

SECTION - A
Select the most appropriate option from those given below each question :
1. An electron and a proton are moving along the same direction with the same kinetic energy. They enter a uniform magnetic field acting perpendicular to their velocities. The dependence of radius of their paths on their masses is :

(a) r ? m	(b)	r ?
(c) 
r ? 1
(d) 
r ?	1

2. A circular loop of radius r, carrying a current I lies in y-z plane with its centre at the origin. The net magnetic flux through the loop is :
(a) directly proportional to r    (b)  zero
(c)  inversely proportional to r   (d)  directly proportional to I	1
3. A cell of emf (E) and internal resistance r is connected across a variable external resistance R. The graph of terminal potential difference V as a function of R is -




1
4. A photocell connected in an electrical circuit is placed at a distance 'd' from a source of light. As a result, current I flows in the circuit. What will be the current in the circuit, when the distance is reduced to 'd/3' ?
(a) I	(b)	6 I	(c)	9 I	(d)	1 I	1
5. A uniform wire of resistance 2R is bent in the form of a circle. The effective resistance between the ends of any diameter of the circle is :
(a) 2R	(b)	R	(c)	R	(d)	R	1
6. A current of 5 A is flowing from east to west in a long straight wire kept on a horizontal table. The magnetic field developed at a distance of 10 cm due south on the table is :
(a) 1 × 10-5 T acting downwards  (b)  1 × 10-5 T acting upwards
(c)  2 × 10-5 T acting downwards  (d)  2 × 10-5 T acting upwards	1
7. The kinetic energy of a proton and that of an ?-particle are 4 eV and 1 eV, respectively. The ratio of the de-Broglie wavelengths associated with them, will be
(a) 2:1	(b)  1:1	(c)  1:2	(d)  4:1	1

8. In the ??particle scattering experiment, the shape of the trajectory of the scattered ??particles depend upon :
(a) only on impact parameter.
(b) only on the source of ??particles.
(c) both impact parameter and source of ??particles.
(d) impact parameter and the screen material of the detector.	1
9. When a wave undergoes reflection at an interface from rarer to denser medium, adhoc change in its phase is :
(a) ?	(b)	0	(c)	?	(d)	?	1
10. Paschen series of atomic spectrum of hydrogen gas lies in :
(a) Infrared region
(b) Ultraviolet region
(c) Visible region
(d) Partly in ultraviolet and partly in visible region	1
Note : Fill in the blanks with appropriate answer :
11. In ?-decay, a neutron is converted into a proton, e- and 	.	1
12. In a linearly polarized light, the electric vector oscillates along a direction perpendicular to the aligned molecules of the polaroid, called 	axis.	1
13. A proton released from rest in an electric field, will start moving towards
a region of 	potential in the field.	1
14. To minimize the percentage error in the determination of unknown resistance of a conductor in meter bridge experiment, the balance point is adjusted near 	of the wire.	1
OR
In potentiometer, a long uniform wire is used to 	 potential
gradient along the wire.	1
15. Torque acting on an electric dipole placed in an electric field is maximum when the angle between the electric field and the dipole moment is
	.	1
Answer the following :
16. An astronomical telescope may be a refracting type or a reflecting type. Which of the two produces image of better quality ? Justify your answer.	1
17. An A.C. source with variable frequency is connected to a parallel plate capacitor. How will the displacement current be affected with the decrease in frequency of the source ?	1

18. Can a slab of p-type semi-conductor be physically joined to another n-type semiconductor slab to form p-n junction ? Justify your answer.	1
OR
In a p-n junction diode the forward bias resistance is low as compared to
the reverse bias resistance. Give reason.	1
19. Depict equipotential surfaces due to an electric dipole.	1
20. Define 'angle of dip' at a place on earth.	1
SECTION - B
21. A uniform wire is cut into three parts with their lengths in the ratio 2:3:6. The ends of each of these three part are connected across an ideal battery of 10 V. If a current of 5 A is drawn from the battery, find the initial
resistance of the wire.	2
22. A resistor R and an inductor L are connected in series to a source of voltage V = Vo sin ?t. The voltage is found to lead current in phase by ?/4. If the inductor is replaced by a capacitor C, the voltage lags behind current in phase by ?/4. When L, C and R are connected in series with the same source, Find the :
(i) average power dissipated and
(ii) instantaneous current in the circuit.	2
23. Find the total charge stored in the network of capacitors connected between A and B as shown in figure.






2
24. (a)	Explain the formation of energy bands in crystalline solids.
(b) Draw the energy band diagrams of (i) a metal and (ii) a semiconductor.	2
25. (a)	Why is a photo diode operated under reverse bias condition ?
(b)	Draw V-I characteristic curves of photo diode for incident light of intensities I1 and I2 (I1 > I2).	2
OR
(a) State the level of doping and biasing condition used in light emitting diode (LED).
(b) Write any two advantages of LED over the conventional low power lamps. 2

26. Briefly explain how a potential barrier is set up across a p-n junction as a result of diffusion and drift of the charge carriers.	2
27. Light of same wavelength is incident on three photo-sensitive surfaces A, B and C. The following observations are recorded.
(i) From surface A, photo electrons are not emitted.
(ii) From surface B, photo electrons are just emitted.
(iii) From surface C, photo electrons with some kinetic energy are emitted. Compare the threshold frequencies of the three surfaces and justify your answer.	2
OR
If the frequency of light incident on the cathode of a photo-cell is increased, how will the following be affected ? Justify your answer.
(i) Energy of the photo electrons.
(ii) Photo current.	2
SECTION - C
28. (a)  Explain the principle of working of a potentiometer.
(b) In a potentiometer, a standard source of emf 5V and negligible internal resistance maintains a steady current through the potentiometer wire of length 10m. Two primary cells of emf E1 and
E2 are joined together in a series with (i) same polarity and
(ii) opposite polarity. The combination is connected to the potentiometer circuit in each case. The balancing length of the wire in the two cases are found to be 700 cm and 100 cm, respectively.
Find the values of emf of the two cells.	3
29. (a)	Differentiate between self inductance and mutual inductance.
(b) The mutual inductance of two coaxial coils is 2H. The current in one coil is changed uniformly from zero to 0.5A in 100 ms. Find the :
(i) change in magnetic flux through the other coil.
(ii) emf induced in the other coil during the change.	3
30. Explain the principle of the device with diagram, which is used to provide electricity at the proper voltage for household purposes.
Briefly discuss loss of energy in it due to flux leakage and its minimization.	3
31. (a)	We feel the warmth of the sun light but not the pressure on our hands. Explain.
(b) Which out of wavelength, frequency and speed of an electro-magnetic wave does not change on passing from one medium to another ?
(c) A thin ozone layer in the upper atmosphere is crucial for human survival on earth, why ?	3

32. Two coherent light waves of intensity 5 × 10-2 Wm-2 each super-impose and produce the interference pattern on a screen. At a point where the path difference between the waves is ?/6, ? being wavelength of the wave, find the
(a) phase difference between the waves.
(b) resultant intensity at the point.
(c) resultant intensity in terms of the intensity at the maximum.	3
33. An object is placed in front of a concave mirror of focal length of 12 cm. There are two possible positions of the object for which the image formed is three times the size of the object.
(a) Draw the ray diagram for the each case, and
(b) Find the distance between the two positions of the object.	3
34. A hollow conducting sphere of inner radius r1 and outer radius r2 has a
charge Q on its surface. A point charge -q is also placed at the centre of the sphere.
(a) What is the surface charge density on the (i) inner and (ii) outer surface of the sphere ?
(b) Use Gauss' law of electrostatics to obtain the expression for the electric field at a point lying outside the sphere.	3
OR
(a) An infinitely long thin straight wire has a uniform linear charge density ?. Obtain the expression for the electric field (E) at a point lying at a distance x from the wire, using Gauss' law.
(b) Show graphically the variation of this electric field E as a function of distance x from the wire.	3
SECTION-D
35. (a)	Derive the law of radioactive decay N = No e-?t
(b) The half life of 238U undergoing ?-decay is 4.5 × 109 years. Find its
92
mean life.
(c) What fraction of the initial mass of a radioactive substance will decay in five half - life periods ?	5
OR
(a) State the postulates of Bohr's model of hydrogen atom and derive the expression for Bohr radius.
(b) Find the ratio of the longest and the shortest wavelengths amongst
the spectral lines of Balmer series in the spectrum of hydrogen atom.	5

36. (a) Show that a current carrying solenoid behaves like a small bar magnet. Obtain the expression for the magnetic field at an external point lying on its axis.
(b) A steady current of 2A flows through a circular coil having 5 turns of radius 7 cm. The coil lies in X-Y plane with its centre at the origin.
Find the magnitude and direction of the magnetic dipole moment of
the coil.	5
OR
(a) Derive the expression for the force acting between two long parallel current carrying conductors. Hence, define 1 A current.
(b) A bar magnet of dipole moment 3 Am2 rests with its centre on a frictionless pivot. A force F is applied at right angles to the axis of the magnet, 10 cm from the pivot. It is observed that an external magnetic field of 0.25 T is required to hold the magnet in equilibrium at an angle of 30° with the field.
Calculate the value of F.
How will the equilibrium be effected if F is withdrawn ?	5
37. (a) Draw the ray diagram showing refraction of ray of light through a glass prism. Derive the expression for the refractive index ? of the material of prism in terms of the angle of prism A and angle of minimum deviation ?m.
(b) A ray of light PQ enters an isosceles right angled prism ABC of refractive index 1.5 as shown in figure.

(i) Trace the path of the ray through the prism.
(ii) What will be the effect on the path of the ray if the refractive index of the prism is 1.4 ?	5
OR
(a) Two thin lenses are placed coaxially in contact. Obtain the expression for the focal length of this combination in terms of the focal lengths of the two lenses.
(b) A converging lens of refractive index 1.5 has a power of 10 D. When it is completely immersed in a liquid, it behaves as a diverging lens
of focal length 50 cm. Find the refractive index of the liquid.	5
15




























